For methods, as we investigated before,
the interesting thing is that the method itself is not part of the person object,
this object only has the two properties.
This method is not part of it,
instead the method is part of its prototype,
so this prototype was added automatically so to say, it's that default prototype which then in turn also
points at yet another prototype which holds our base class object.
So we got two prototypes instead of one which you might have expected based on our inheritance.
Now this setup is a setup Javascript does for us so to say for a good reason.
The idea here is that when we create instances of person, we want to have different property values, here
actually all persons we create have the same name and the name age because it's hardcoded in the class
but often you want to assign different data, different values
you store in your objects.
Now methods on the other hand typically are the same across all objects,
the logic you have in here might refer to your data but it does so in a way that different data
is reflected automatically because we didn't hardcode the data in here,
instead we refer to the properties which in turn might hold dynamic data.
So the function logic typically does not change from object to object,
it typically is the same and therefore Javascript adds a little optimization for us here. By adding the
method to a prototype, it makes sure that when ever we create a new person object, we use the same prototype
fallback object.
It's a little optimization which leads to less objects being created, which means less memory usage and
of course less performance because creating objects costs performance, so less performance impact
I should say and I can prove this to you.
If I create another object, p2, another new person and now we check if the prototype of p is the same with
the triple equality operator,
not that it would matter with objects but anyways, then you will see that we will get true here as a
result if I reload this. We get true because they're using the exact same object, not an object that's
created in the same way,
no the exact same object in memory.
So by adding that method to that exact same object, we can share that object and hence it only needs
to be created once
even if we add 100 persons, so that saves memory and performance. So that's a little optimization we get
here when we add a method like this.
The equivalent if we would build it on our own therefore would be that we don't create a constructor
function like that where we set up this as a property in the constructor function but that instead, we
add it here on the prototype of our constructor function,
so on this blueprint for the fallback value so to say. If we do that, then we make sure that greet is
only created once, it's created here
when Javascript executes this code block, when it executes the script and thereafter whenever we build
a new object, a new person based on this constructor function, only this code is re-executed over and
over again,
only these values are recreated over and over again,
this function is not recreated, instead
every new person just gets this prototype assigned and therefore has access to this function.
So this here is basically equivalent to this setup here
you could say, without the extends keyword.
So now this class is equivalent to this setup down there,
that's what Javascript does for us and it's a little optimization.
Now the code we had before, where I added greet like this here inside of my constructor function could
also be rebuilt here in my class.
Option number one is to go into the constructor and here say this greet equals function something, option
number two is to use a field where you don't use the method shorthand because that method shorthand
is the trigger for Javascript to do that optimization but instead, you use an equal sign here and then
assign a function and it doesn't matter if it's an arrow function or a function created like this.
If you do that, if you create that method like this, you can call it like before,
you'll not see a difference.
If I comment this normal constructor function out and I go back down to my code, p.greet will work,
this will work just fine and by the way I now also have to remove super because I'm not extending anything
anymore but this will work just fine. If we reload,
we see that output here but technically something different will be happening here.
If I console log p here, you will see that now in that object, greet is part of this object itself, no
longer part of the prototype and that means that this function here is indeed created for every instance
of this object,
every instance based on this class.
Now that means that we occupy more memory and a creation of such an object of course also costs some
performance.
Now it of course depends on the app you're building, in many apps that might not matter a bit because whenever
I say it costs performance and it occupies memory, of course I'm talking about milliseconds or less of
performance impact
and of kilobytes or less than kilobytes of memory impact.
So we're not talking about a huge impact,
so doing this here is not necessarily false or super bad,
I just want you to understand that there is a difference and typically you might want to avoid doing that.
However a common use case where this can be helpful is if you use an arrow function here because then
this will actually guarantee you that this in there refers to your surrounding class.
So if you then for example bind this to an event listener or something like that,
this can be easier than using this more correct syntax where you then have to use the bind method to
bind this correctly when assigning this to an event listener,
that's a small scenario where this might be good to use, this plus bind will actually still be a bit
better from a performance perspective but due to the better readability this approach has versus this
this plus adding bind on some event listening code might lead to this being used despite it being a
bit worse but since the performance and memory impact is so marginal, if you're not building hundreds
or thousands of persons, it might really not matter
and then using this might be beneficial.
Here is the example I meant, if we have some button
which I get by ID, btn let's say
and then we add an event listener here, a click event listener and we bind this to p.greet and I quickly
add this button here to the index.html file, greet me, then you will see that with this button and
the event listener added, if I use this arrow function syntax and the syntax where I store it in a property
instead of using the shorthand and by the way in case you're wondering,
note the shorthand is not available for arrow functions.
So if I use this syntax, you will see that it works,
just one thing before I forget it,
of course I need to add that btn ID here to the button,
so let's add that and now if I add this and I run this code, reload here, you will see that if I click
greet me, this works as we would expect
or how we would want it to behave
and now this is what I meant.
If we instead use the more correct shorthand here, this will not work because this will now refer to
the button and not to the class because of how event listeners work and how this works,
so here you see Hi I am
and I am undefined years old,
so this is then that part where you could of course use bind here and here, not bind this but bind it
to p so that this inside of greet refers to p,
this would work and therefore if I save that, of course that is a perfect alternative,
we get the desired result but this is a bit harder to read so you might prefer this here but it's personal
preference of course.
Bind here takes a bit less performance typically than using this approach,
so this plus bind is preferable but that is something you can use if you're not creating thousands of
objects.
Here's a summary which you also find attached for creating methods in classes or in constructor functions,
we got three different ways - we can use the method shorthand in classes like this and this will then
automatically by Javascript be assigned to the prototype of person and be shared across all instances,
hence it's not recreated per instance
or we use a property function or a property arrow function which also helps us with this, a normal property
function will not help us with this. A property function would look like this in a class, a property arrow
function like this,
alternatively you can always also add it in a constructor function as shown in the constructor part of
these code snippets here and here, we of course create a new function for every object which is also
why we get help with arrow functions and this and therefore this might be helpful
but again it costs some performance, so it's typically not recommended but if you're not creating thousands
of these objects, it should be fine in most applications.
So just something to be aware of,
more important of course is that you generally understand the idea of prototypes and what Javascript
does there and what class is and extends and so on does for you there.